SITUATED KNOWLEDGES:
THE SCIENCE QUESTION IN FEMINISM
AND THE PRIVILEGE OF PARTIAL
PERSPECTIVE
DONNA HARAWAY
Academic and activist feminist inquiry has repeatedly tried to
come to terms with the question of what we might mean by the
curious and inescapablet erm "objectivity.W" e have used a lot of
toxic ink and trees processed into paper decrying what they have
meant and how it hurts us. The imagined" they"co nstitutea kind
of invisible conspiracy of masculinist scientists and philosophers
replete with grants and laboratories. The imagined "we" are the
embodied others, who are not allowed not to have a body, a finite
point of view, and so an inevitablyd isqualifyinga nd pollutingb ias
in any discussion of consequence outside our own little circles,
where a "mass"-subscriptijoonu rnal might reach a few thousand
readers composed mostly of science haters. At least, I confess to
these paranoid fantasies and academic resentments lurking underneath
some convoluted reflections in print under my name in the
feminist literature in the history and philosophy of science. We,
the feminists in the debates about science and technology, are the
Reagan era's "special-interesgt roups"i n the rarified realm of
epistemology,w here traditionallyw hat can count as knowledgei s
policed by philosophers codifying cognitive canon law. Of course,
a special-interesgt roupi s, by Reaganoidd efinition,a ny collective
historicals ubjectt hat darest o resistt he stripped-downa tomismo f
Star Wars, hypermarket, postmodern, media-simulated citizenship.
Max Headroom doesn't have a body; therefore, he alone sees
everythingi n the greatc ommunicator'se mpire of the GlobalN etwork.
No wonder Max gets to have a naive sense of humor and a
kind of happily regressive, preoedipal sexuality, a sexuality that
FeministS tudies1 4, no. 3 (Fall 1988).? 1988 by Feminist Studies,I nc.
575
This content downloaded from 128.12.188.47 on Sat, 22 Feb 2014 19:10:30 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
576 Donna Haraway
we ambivalently- with dangerousi ncorrectness- had imaginedt o
be reserved for lifelong inmates of female and colonized bodies
and maybe also white male computer hackers in solitary electronic
confinement.
It has seemed to me that feminists have both selectively and
flexibly used and been trapped by two poles of a tempting
dichotomy on the question of objectivity. Certainly I speak for
myself here, and I offer the speculation that there is a collective
discourse on these matters. Recent social studies of science and
technology, for example, have made available a very strong social
constructionista rgumentf or all forms of knowledgec laims, most
certainly and especially scientific ones.' According to these tempting
views, no insider's perspective is privileged, because all drawings
of inside-outside boundaries in knowledge are theorized as
power moves, not moves toward truth. So, from the strong social
constructionist perspective, why should we be cowed by scientists'd
escriptionso f their activitya nd accomplishmentst;h ey and
their patrons have stakes in throwing sand in our eyes. They tell
parables about objectivity and scientific method to students in the
first years of their initiation,b ut no practitionero f the high scientific
arts would be caught dead acting on the textbook versions.
Socialc onstructionistsm ake cleart hat officiali deologiesa bout objectivity
and scientificm ethod are particularlyb ad guides to how
scientific knowledge is actually made. Just as for the rest of us,
what scientists believe or say they do and what they really do have
a very loose fit.
The only people who end up actuallyb elievinga nd, goddessf orbid,
acting on the ideological doctrines of disembodied scientific
objectivity-enshrined in elementary textbooks and technoscience
booster literature-are nonscientists, including a few very trusting
philosophers. Of course, my designation of this last group is probably
just a reflection of a residual disciplinary chauvinism acquired
from identifying with historians of science and from spending
too much time with a microscope in early adulthood in a kind
of disciplinary preoedipal and modernist poetic moment when
cells seemed to be cells and organisms, organisms. Pace, Gertrude
Stein. But then came the law of the father and its resolution of the
problem of objectivity, a problem solved by always already absent
referents, deferred signifieds, split subjects, and the endless play
of signifiers. Who wouldn't grow up warped? Gender, race, the
This content downloaded from 128.12.188.47 on Sat, 22 Feb 2014 19:10:30 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
Donna Haraway 577
world itself-all seem the effects of warp speeds in the play of
signifiers in a cosmic force field.
In any case, social constructionists might maintain that the
ideological doctrine of scientific method and all the philosophical
verbiage about epistemology were cooked up to distract our attention
from getting to know the world effectivelyb y practicingt he
sciences. From this point of view, science -the real game in town -
is rhetoric, a series of efforts to persuade relevant social actors that
one'sm anufacturedk nowledgei s a routet o a desiredf orm of very
objective power. Such persuasions must take account of the structure
of facts and artifacts,a s well as of language-mediateadc torsi n
the knowledge game. Here, artifacts and facts are parts of the
powerful art of rhetoric. Practice is persuasion, and the focus is
very much on practice. All knowledge is a condensed node in an
agonistic power field. The strong program in the sociology of
knowledge joins with the lovely and nasty tools of semiology and
deconstructiont o insist on the rhetoricaln atureo f truth,i ncluding
scientific truth. History is a story Western culture buffs tell each
other; science is a contestable text and a power field; the content is
the form.2 Period.
So much for those of us who would still like to talk about reality
with more confidence than we allow to the Christian Right when
they discuss the Second Coming and their being raptured out of
the final destruction of the world. We would like to think our appeals
to real worlds are more than a desperate lurch away from
cynicism and an act of faith like any other cult's, no matter how
much space we generously give to all the rich and always historically
specific mediations through which we and everybody else
must know the world. But the further I get in describing the
radical social constructionistp rograma nd a particularv ersion of
postmodernism, coupled with the acid tools of critical discourse in
the human sciences, the more nervous I get. The imagery of force
fields, of moves in a fully textualized and coded world, which is
the working metaphor in many arguments about socially negotiated
reality for the postmodern subject, is, just for starters, an imagery
of high-tech military fields, of automated academic battlefields,
where blips of light calledp layersd isintegrate( whata metaphor!)
each other in order to stay in the knowledge and power
game. Technoscience and science fiction collapse into the sun of
their radiant( ir)reality-war.3I t shouldn'tt ake decadeso f feminist
This content downloaded from 128.12.188.47 on Sat, 22 Feb 2014 19:10:30 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
578 Donna Haraway
theory to sense the enemy here. Nancy Hartsock got all this crystal
clear in her concept of abstract masculinity.4
I, and others, started out wanting a strong tool for deconstructing
the truth claims of hostile science by showing the radical historicals
pecificity,a nd so contestabilityo, f everyl ayer of the onion
of scientifica nd technologicalc onstructionsa, nd we end up with a
kind of epistemological electroshock therapy, which far from
ushering us into the high stakes tables of the game of contesting
public truths, lays us out on the table with self-induced multiple
personality disorder. We wanted a way to go beyond showing bias
in science (that proved too easy anyhow) and beyond separating
the good scientific sheep from the bad goats of bias and misuse. It
seemed promising to do this by the strongest possible constructionist
argument that left no cracks for reducing the issues to bias
versus objectivity, use versus misuse, science versus pseudoscience.
We unmasked the doctrines of objectivity because they
threatened our budding sense of collective historical subjectivity
and agency and our "embodieda"c countso f the truth,a nd we ended
up with one more excuse for not learning any post-Newtonian
physics and one more reason to drop the old feminist self-help
practices of repairing our own cars. They're just texts anyway, so
let the boys have them back.
Some of us tried to stay sane in these disassembled and dissembling
times by holding out for a feminist version of objectivity.
Here, motivated by many of the same political desires, is the other
seductive end of the objectivity problem. Humanistic Marxism
was polluted at the source by its structuring theory about the
dominationo f nature in the self-constructiono f man and by its
closely related impotence in relation to historicizing anything
women did that didn't qualify for a wage. But Marxism was still a
promising resource as a kind of epistemological feminist mental
hygiene that sought our own doctrines of objective vision. Marxist
starting points offered a way to get to our own versions of standpoint
theories, insistent embodiment, a rich tradition of critiquing
hegemony without disempowering positivisms and relativisms
and a way to get to nuanced theories of mediation. Some versions
of psychoanalysis were of aid in this approach, especially anglophone
object relations theory, which maybe did more for U.S.
socialist feminism for a time than anything from the pen of Marx
or Engels, much less Althusser or any of the late pretenders to son-
This content downloaded from 128.12.188.47 on Sat, 22 Feb 2014 19:10:30 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
Donna Haraway 579
ship treating the subject of ideology and science.5
Another approach," feministe mpiricism,"a lso converges with
feminist uses of Marxian resources to get a theory of science
which continues to insist on legitimate meanings of objectivity and
which remains leery of a radical constructivism conjugated with
semiologya nd narratology.F6 eministsh ave to insist on a bettera ccount
of the world; it is not enough to show radical historical contingency
and modes of construction for everything. Here, we, as
feminists, find ourselves perversely conjoined with the discourse
of many practicing scientists, who, when all is said and done,
mostly believe they are describing and discovering things by means
of all their constructing and arguing. Evelyn Fox Keller has been
particularlyin sistento n this fundamentalm atter,a nd SandraH arding
calls the goal of these approachesa "successors cience."F eminists
have stakes in a successor science project that offers a more
adequate, richer, better account of a world, in order to live in it
well and in critical, reflexive relation to our own as well as others'
practices of domination and the unequal parts of privilege and oppression
that make up all positions. In traditional philosophical
categories, the issue is ethics and politics perhaps more than
epistemology.
So, I think my problem,a nd "ourp"r oblem,i s how to have simultaneously
an account of radical historical contingency for all
knowledge claims and knowing subjects, a critical practice for
recognizingo ur own "semiotict echnologies"fo r makingm eanings,
and a no-nonsense commitment to faithful accounts of a "real"
world, one that can be partially shared and that is friendly to
earthwide projects of finite freedom, adequate material abundance,
modest meaning in suffering, and limited happiness. Harding
calls this necessary multiple desire a need for a successor
science project and a postmodern insistence on irreducible difference
and radical multiplicity of local knowledges. All components
of the desire are paradoxicala nd dangerous,a nd their combinationi
s both contradictorya nd necessary.F eministsd on'tn eed
a doctrine of objectivity that promises transcendence, a story that
loses track of its mediations just where someone might be held
responsiblef or something,a nd unlimitedi nstrumentapl ower. We
don't want a theory of innocent powers to represent the world,
where language and bodies both fall into the bliss of organic symbiosis.
We also don't want to theorize the world, much less act
This content downloaded from 128.12.188.47 on Sat, 22 Feb 2014 19:10:30 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
580 Donna Haraway
within it, in terms of Global Systems, but we do need an earthwide
network of connections, including the ability partially to
translate knowledges among very different-and power-differentiated
- communities. We need the power of modern critical
theories of how meanings and bodies get made, not in order to
deny meanings and bodies, but in order to build meanings and
bodies that have a chance for life.
Natural, social, and human sciences have always been implicated
in hopes like these. Science has been about a search for
translationc, onvertibilitym, obilityo f meanings,a nd universalitywhich
I call reductionism only when one language (guess whose?)
must be enforceda s the standardf or all the translationsa nd conversions.
What money does in the exchange orders of capitalism,
reductionism does in the powerful mental orders of global
sciences. There is, finally, only one equation. That is the deadly
fantasy that feminists and others have identified in some versions
of objectivity, those in the service of hierarchical and positivist
orderings of what can count as knowledge. That is one of the
reasons the debates about objectivitym atter,m etaphoricallya nd
otherwise.I mmortalitya nd omnipotencea re not our goals.B ut we
could use some enforceable, reliable accounts of things not reducible
to power moves and agonistic,h igh-statusg ames of rhetorico r
to scientistic, positivist arrogance. This point applies whether we
are talking about genes, social classes, elementary particles,
genders, races, or texts; the point applies to the exact, natural,
social, and human sciences, despite the slippery ambiguities of the
words "objectivitya"n d "science"as we slide aroundt he discursive
terrain. In our efforts to climb the greased pole leading to a usable
doctrineo f objectivity,I and most otherf eministsi n the objectivity
debates have alternatively, or even simultaneously, held on to
both ends of the dichotomy, a dichotomy which Harding describes
in terms of successor science projects versus postmodernist
accounts of difference and which I have sketched in this essay as
radicalc onstructivismv ersus feminist criticale mpiricism.I t is, of
course, hard to climb when you are holding on to both ends of a
pole, simultaneously or alternatively. It is, therefore, time to
switch metaphors.
This content downloaded from 128.12.188.47 on Sat, 22 Feb 2014 19:10:30 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
Donna Haraway 581
THE PERSISTENCE OF VISION
I would like to proceed by placing metaphorical reliance on a
much maligned sensory system in feminist discourse: vision.7 Vision
can be good for avoiding binary oppositions. I would like to
insist on the embodied nature of all vision and so reclaim the sensory
system that has been used to signify a leap out of the marked
body and into a conquering gaze from nowhere. This is the gaze
that mythically inscribes all the marked bodies, that makes the unmarked
category claim the power to see and not be seen, to represent
while escaping representation. This gaze signifies the unmarked
positions of Man and White, one of the many nasty tones
of the word "objectivityt"o feminist ears in scientific and technological,
late-industrial,m ilitarized,r acist, and male-dominant
societies, that is, here, in the belly of the monster, in the United
States in the late 1980s. I would like a doctrine of embodied objectivity
that accommodates paradoxical and critical feminist
science projects: Feminist objectivity means quite simply situated
knowledges.
The eyes have been used to signify a perverse capacity-honed
to perfection in the history of science tied to militarism, capitalism,
colonialism, and male supremacy-to distance the knowing
subject from everybody and everything in the interests of
unfettered power. The instruments of visualization in multinationalist,
p ostmodernistc ultureh ave compoundedt hese meanings
of disembodiment. The visualizing technologies are without apparent
limit. The eye of any ordinary primate like us can be endlessly
enhanced by sonography systems, magnetic reasonance
imaging, artificial intelligence-linked graphic manipulation systems,
scanning electron microscopes, computed tomography scanners,
color-enhancement techniques, satellite surveillance systems,
home and office video display terminals, cameras for every
purpose from filming the mucous membrane lining the gut cavity
of a marine worm living in the vent gases on a fault between continental
plates to mapping a planetary hemisphere elsewhere in the
solars ystem.V isioni n this technologicafle astb ecomesu nregulated
gluttony; all seems not just mythically about the god trick of seeing
everything from nowhere, but to have put the myth into ordinary
practice. And like the god trick, this eye fucks the world to make
techno-monsters. Zoe Sofoulis calls this the cannibaleye of masculinist
extra-terrestriaplr ojectsf or excrementals econd birthing.
This content downloaded from 128.12.188.47 on Sat, 22 Feb 2014 19:10:30 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
582 Donna Haraway
A tribute to this ideology of direct, devouring, generative, and
unrestricted vision, whose technological mediations are simultaneously
celebrated and presented as utterly transparent, can be
found in the volume celebrating the 100th anniversary of the National
Geographic Society. The volume closes its survey of the
magazine's quest literature, effected through its amazing
photographyw, ith two juxtaposedc hapters.T he firsti s on "Space,"
introduced by the epigraph, "The choice is the universe-or
nothing."T8 his chapterr ecountst he exploitso f the space race and
displays the color-enhanced" snapshotso"f the outer planets reassembledf
rom digitalizeds ignalst ransmitteda crossv ast space to
let the viewer "experiencet"h e moment of discoveryi n immediate
vision of the "object."T9h ese fabulouso bjectsc ome to us simultaneously
as indubitable recordings of what is simply there and as
heroic feats of technoscientific production. The next chapter, is
the twin of outer space:" InnerS pace,"in troducedb y the epigraph,
"Thes tuff of starsh as come alive."1H0 ere, the readeri s broughti nto
the realmo f the infinitesimal,o bjectifiedb y means of radiation
outsidet he wave lengthst hat are "normallyp"e rceivedb y hominid
primates, that is, the beams of lasers and scanning electron
microscopes, whose signals are processed into the wonderful fullcolor
snapshots of defending T cells and invading viruses.
But, of course, that view of infinite vision is an illusion, a god
trick. I would like to suggesth ow our insistingm etaphoricallyo n
the particularitya nd embodimento f all vision (althoughn ot necessarily
organic embodiment and including technological mediation),
and not giving in to the tempting myths of vision as a route
to disembodimenta nd second-birthinga llows us to construct a
usable, but not an innocent, doctrine of objectivity. I want a
feminist writing of the body that metaphorically emphasizes vision
again, because we need to reclaim that sense to find our way
through all the visualizing tricks and powers of modem sciences
and technologies that have transformed the objectivity debates.
We need to learn in our bodies, endowed with primate color and
stereoscopic vision, how to attach the objective to our theoretical
and political scanners in order to name where we are and are not,
in dimensions of mental and physical space we hardly know how
to name. So, not so perversely, objectivity turns out to be about
particular and specific embodiment and definitely not about the
false vision promising transcendence of all limits and responsibili-
This content downloaded from 128.12.188.47 on Sat, 22 Feb 2014 19:10:30 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
Donna Haraway 583
ty. The moral is simple: only partial perspective promises objective
vision. All Western cultural narratives about objectivity are
allegories of the ideologies governing the relations of what we call
mind and body, distancea nd responsibilityF. eministo bjectivityi s
about limited location and situated knowledge, not about transcendence
and splitting of subject and object. It allows us to
become answerable for what we learn how to see.
These are lessons that I learned in part walking with my dogs
and wondering how the world looks without a fovea and very few
retinal cells for color vision but with a huge neural processing and
sensorya reaf or smells. It is a lesson availablef rom photographso f
how the world looks to the compound eyes of an insect or even
from the camera eye of a spy satellite or the digitally transmitted
signals of space probe-perceivedd ifferences "near"J upiter that
have been transformed into coffee table color photographs. The
"eyes"m ade availablei n modernt echnologicals ciences shattera ny
idea of passive vision; these prosthetic devices show us that all
eyes, including our own organic ones, are active perceptual
systems, buildingo n translationsa nd specific wayso f seeing, that
is, ways of life. There is no unmediated photograph or passive
camera obscura in scientific accounts of bodies and machines;
there are only highly specific visual possibilities, each with a
wonderfullyd etailed,a ctive, partialw ay of organizingw orlds. All
these pictures of the world should not be allegories of infinite
mobility and interchangeabilityb ut of elaborate specificity and
difference and the loving care people might take to learn how to
see faithfullyf rom another'sp oint of view, even when the other is
our own machine. That's not alienating distance; that's a possible
allegory for feminist versions of objectivity. Understanding how
these visual systems work, technically, socially, and psychically,
ought to be a way of embodying feminist objectivity.
Many currents in feminism attempt to theorize grounds for
trusting especially the vantage points of the subjugated; there is
good reason to believe vision is better from below the brilliant
space platforms of the powerful." Building on that suspicion, this
essay is an argument for situated and embodied knowledges and
an argument against various forms of unlocatable, and so irresponsible,
knowledge claims. Irresponsiblem eans unable to be called
into account. There is a premium on establishing the capacity to
see from the peripheries and the depths. But here there also lies a
This content downloaded from 128.12.188.47 on Sat, 22 Feb 2014 19:10:30 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
584 Donna Haraway
serious dangero f romanticizinga nd/ora ppropriatingth e vision of
the less powerful while claiming to see from their positions. To see
from below is neither easily learned nor unproblematic, even if
"we"" naturally"in habit the great undergroundt errain of subjugatedk
nowledges.T he positioningso f the subjugateda re not exempt
from critical reexamination, decoding, deconstruction, and
interpretation;t hat is, from both semiologicala nd hermeneutic
modes of critical inquiry. The standpoints of the subjugated are
not "innocent"p ositions. On the contrary, they are preferred
because in principle they are least likely to allow denial of the
critical and interpretive core of all knowledge. They are knowledgeable
of modes of denial through repression, forgetting, and
disappearinga cts-ways of being nowhere while claimingt o see
comprehensively. The subjugated have a decent chance to be on
to the god trick and all its dazzling-and, therefore, blinding-illuminations.
"Subjugateds"ta ndpointsa re preferredb ecause they
seem to promise more adequate, sustained, objective, transforming
accounts of the world. But how to see from below is a problem
requiring at least as much skill with bodies and language, with the
mediations of vision, as the "highest' technoscientific visualizations.
Such preferred positioning is as hostile to various forms of relativism
as to the most explicitlyt otalizingv ersionso f claimst o scientific
authority. But the alternative to relativism is not totalization
and single vision, which is always finally the unmarked category
whose power depends on systematic narrowing and obscuring.
The alternative to relativism is partial, locatable, critical knowledges
sustaining the possibility of webs of connections called
solidarity in politics and shared conversations in epistemology.
Relativism is a way of being nowhere while claiming to be everywhere
equally. The "equalityo"f positioningi s a denial of responsibility
and critical inquiry. Relativism is the perfect mirror twin of
totalizationin the ideologieso f objectivity;b oth deny the stakesi n
location, embodiment, and partial perspective; both make it impossible
to see well. Relativism and totalization are both "god
tricks" promising vision from everywhere and nowhere equally
and fully, common myths in rhetoricss urroundingS cience.B ut it
is precisely in the politics and epistemology of partial perspectives
that the possibility of sustained, rational, objective inquiry rests.
So, with many other feminists, I want to argue for a doctrine and
This content downloaded from 128.12.188.47 on Sat, 22 Feb 2014 19:10:30 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
Donna Haraway 585
practice of objectivity that privileges contestation, deconstruction,
passionate construction, webbed connections, and hope for transformation
of systems of knowledge and ways of seeing. But not
just any partial perspective will do; we must be hostile to easy relativisms
and holisms built out of summing and subsuming parts.
"Passionated etachment"1r2e quiresm ore than acknowledgeda nd
self-criticapl artiality.W e are also bound to seek perspectivef rom
those points of view, which can never be known in advance, that
promise somethingq uite extraordinaryt,h at is, knowledgep otent
for constructing worlds less organized by axes of domination.
From such a viewpoint, the unmarked category would really disappear-
quite a difference from simply repeating a disappearing
act. The imaginary and the rational-the visionary and objective
vision- hover close together.I think Harding'sp lea for a successor
science and for postmodern sensibilities must be read as an argument
for the idea that the fantastic element of hope for transformative
knowledge and the severe check and stimulus of sustained
critical inquiry are jointly the ground of any believable claim to
objectivityo r rationalityn ot riddledw ith breathtakingd enialsa nd
repressions. It is even possible to read the record of scientific
revolutionsi n terms of this feministd octrineo f rationalitya nd objectivity.
Science has been utopian and visionary from the start;
that is one reason "we"n eed it.
A commitment to mobile positioning and to passionate detachment
is dependent on the impossibility of entertaining innocent
"identityp"o litics and epistemologiesa s strategiesf or seeing from
the standpoints of the subjugated in order to see well. One cannot
"be" either a cell or molecule-or a woman, colonized person,
laborer, and so on-if one intends to see and see from these positions
critically." Beingi"s much more problematica nd contingent.
Also, one cannot relocate in any possible vantage point without
being accountable for that movement. Vision is always a question
of the power to see-and perhaps of the violence implicit in our
visualizing practices. With whose blood were my eyes crafted?
These points also apply to testimony from the position of "oneself."
We are not immediately present to ourselves. Self-knowledge requiresa
semiotic-materiatle chnologyt o link meaningsa nd bodies.
Self-identityis a bad visual system. Fusioni s a bad strategyo f positioning.
The boys in the human sciences have called this doubt
about self-presencet he "deatho f the subject"d efined as a single
This content downloaded from 128.12.188.47 on Sat, 22 Feb 2014 19:10:30 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
586 Donna Haraway
ordering point of will and consciousness. That judgment seems
bizarre to me. I prefer to call this doubt the opening of nonisomorphic
subjects, agents, and territories of stories unimaginable
from the vantage point of the cyclopean, self-satiated eye of the
master subject. The Western eye has fundamentally been a
wanderinge ye, a travelingl ens. These peregrinationsh ave often
been violent and insistent on having mirrors for a conquering
self-but not always. Western feminists also inherit some skill in
learningt o participatei n revisualizingw orlds turnedu pside down
in earth-transformincgh allengest o the views of the masters.A ll is
not to be done from scratch.
The split and contradictorys elf is the one who can interrogate
positionings and be accountable, the one who can construct and
join rational conversations and fantastic imaginings that change
history.13 Splitting, not being, is the privileged image for feminist
epistemologieso f scientific knowledge. "Splittingi"n this context
should be about heterogeneous multiplicities that are simultaneously
salient and incapable of being squashed into isomorphic
slots or cumulative lists. This geometry pertains within and among
subjects.S ubjectivityi s multidimensionals; o, therefore,i s vision.
The knowing self is partial in all its guises, never finished, whole,
simply there and original;i t is always constructeda nd stitchedt ogether
imperfectly,a nd thereforea ble to join with another,t o see
together without claiming to be another. Here is the promise of objectivity:
a scientific knower seeks the subject position, not of
identity, but of objectivity, that is, partial connection. There is no
way to "be"s imultaneouslyi n all, or wholly in any, of the privileged
(i.e., subjugated) positions structured by gender, race, nation,
and class. And that is a short list of critical positions. The
search for such a "full"a nd total position is the search for the
fetishized perfect subject of oppositional history, sometimes appearing
in feminist theory as the essentialized Third World
Woman.14S ubjugationis not groundsf or an ontology;i t might be
a visual clue. Vision requires instruments of vision; an optics is a
politics of positioning. Instruments of vision mediate standpoints;
there is no immediate vision from the standpoints of the subjugated.
I dentity,i ncludings elf-identityd, oes not produces cience;
critical positioning does, that is, objectivity. Only those occupying
the positions of the dominators are self-identical, unmarked,
disembodied, unmediated, transcendent, born again. It is unfor-
This content downloaded from 128.12.188.47 on Sat, 22 Feb 2014 19:10:30 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
Donna Haraway 587
tunately possible for the subjugated to lust for and even scramble
into that subject position-and then disappear from view.
Knowledge from the point of view of the unmarked is truly fantastic,
distorted,a nd irrational.T he only position from which objectivity
could not possibly be practiced and honored is the standpoint
of the master, the Man, the One God, whose Eye produces,
appropriatesa, nd orders all difference. No one ever accused the
God of monotheism of objectivity, only of indifference. The god
trick is self-identicala, nd we have mistakent hat for creativitya nd
knowledge, omniscience even.
Positioning is, therefore, the key practice in grounding knowledge
organized around the imagery of vision, and much Western
scientific and philosophic discourse is organized in this way. Positioningi
mplies responsibilityf or our enablingp ractices.I t follows
that politics and ethics ground struggles for and contests over what
may count as rational knowledge. That is, admitted or not, politics
and ethics ground struggles over knowledge projects in the exact,
natural, social, and human sciences. Otherwise, rationality is
simply impossible, an optical illusion projected from nowhere
comprehensively. Histories of science may be powerfully told as
histories of the technologies. These technologies are ways of life,
social orders, practices of visualization. Technologies are skilled
practices. How to see? Where to see from? What limits to vision?
What to see for? Whom to see with? Who gets to have more than
one point of view? Who gets blinded? Who wears blinders? Who
interprets the visual field? What other sensory powers do we wish
to cultivate besides vision? Moral and political discourse should be
the paradigm for rational discourse about the imagery and technologies
of vision. SandraH arding'sc laim, or observation,t hat movements
of social revolutionh ave most contributedt o improvements
in science might be read as a claim about the knowledge consequences
of new technologies of positioning. But I wish Harding
had spent more time remembering that social and scientific
revolutions have not always been liberatory, even if they have
always been visionary. Perhaps this point could be captured in
anotherp hrase:t he science questioni n the military.S truggleso ver
what will count as rational accounts of the world are struggles
over how to see. The terms of vision: the science question in
colonialism, the science question in exterminism,s't5h e science
question in feminism.
This content downloaded from 128.12.188.47 on Sat, 22 Feb 2014 19:10:30 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
588 Donna Haraway
The issue in politically engaged attacks on various empiricisms,
reductionisms, or other versions of scientific authority should not
be relativism-but location. A dichotomous chart expressing this
point might look like this:
universal rationality
common language
new organon
unified field theory
world system
master theory
ethnophilosophies
heteroglossia
deconstruction
oppositional positioning
local knowledges
webbed accounts
But a dichotomous chart misrepresents in a critical way the positions
of embodied objectivity that I am trying to sketch. The primary
distortion is the illusion of symmetry in the chart's dichotomy,
making any position appear, first, simply alternative
and, second, mutually exclusive. A map of tensions and reasonances
between the fixed ends of a charged dichotomy better represents
the potent politics and epistemologies of embodied, therefore
accountable, objectivity. For example, local knowledges have
also to be in tension with the productive structurings that force
unequal translations and exchanges - material and semiotic - within
the webs of knowledge and power. Webs can have the property
of being systematic, even of being centrally structured global
systems with deep filaments and tenacious tendrils into time,
space, and consciousness, which are the dimensions of world
history. Feminist accountability requires a knowledge tuned to
reasonance, not to dichotomy. Gender is a field of structured and
structuringd ifference,i n which the tones of extremel ocalization,
of the intimatelyp ersonala nd individualizedb ody, vibratei n the
same field with global high-tension emissions. Feminist embodiment,
then, is not about fixed location in a reified body, female or
otherwise, but about nodes in fields, inflections in orientations,
and responsibility for difference in material-semiotic fields of
meaning. Embodiment is significant prosthesis; objectivity cannot
be about fixed vision when what counts as an object is precisely
what world history turns out to be about.
How should one be positioned in order to see, in this situation of
tensions, reasonances, transformations, resistances, and complicities?
Here, primate vision is not immediately a very powerful
metaphoro r technologyf or feministp olitical-epistemologicacll ari-
This content downloaded from 128.12.188.47 on Sat, 22 Feb 2014 19:10:30 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
Donna Haraway 589
fication, because it seems to present to consciousness already processed
and objectified fields; things seem already fixed and distanced.
But the visual metaphor allows one to go beyond fixed appearances,
which are only the end products. The metaphor invites
us to investigate the varied apparatuses of visual production, including
the prosthetic technologies interfaced with our biological
eyes and brains. And here we find highly particularm achineries
for processing regions of the electromagnetic spectrum into our
pictures of the world. It is in the intricacies of these visualization
technologies in which we are embedded that we will find metaphors
and means for understanding and intervening in the patterns
of objectificationin the world-that is, the patternso f reality
for which we must be accountable. In these metaphors, we find
means for appreciating simultaneously both the concrete, "real"
aspect and the aspect of semiosis and production in what we call
scientific knowledge.
I am arguing for politics and epistemologies of location, positioning,
and situating,w here partialitya nd not universalityi s the condition
of being heard to make rational knowledge claims. These
are claims on people's lives. I am arguing for the view from a body,
always a complex, contradictory, structuring, and structured
body, versus the view from above, from nowhere, from simplicity.
Only the god trick is forbidden. Here is a criterion for
deciding the science question in militarism, that dream science/
technology of perfect language, perfect communication, final
order.
Feminism loves another science: the sciences and politics of interpretation,
translation, stuttering, and the partly understood.
Feminism is about the sciences of the multiple subject with (at
least) double vision. Feminism is about a critical vision consequent
upon a critical positioning in unhomogeneous gendered social
space.16 Translation is always interpretive, critical, and partial.
Here is a ground for conversation, rationality, and objectivity-
which is power-sensitive,n ot pluralist," conversation.I"t is
not even the mythic cartoonso f physics and mathematics- incorrectly
caricatured in antiscience ideology as exact, hypersimple
knowledges -that have come to represent the hostile other to feminist
paradigmaticm odels of scientifick nowledge,b ut the dreams
of the perfectly known in high-technology, permanently militarized
scientific productions and positionings, the god trick of a Star
This content downloaded from 128.12.188.47 on Sat, 22 Feb 2014 19:10:30 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
590 Donna Haraway
Wars paradigm of rational knowledge. So location is about vulnerability;
l ocationr esistst he politicso f closure,f inality,o r to borrow
from Althusser,f eminist objectivityr esists "simplificationin
the last instance."T hat is because feministe mbodimentr esistsf ixation
and is insatiablyc uriousa bout the webs of differentialp ositioning.
There is no single feminist standpoint because our maps
require too many dimensions for that metaphor to ground our visions.
But the feminist standpoint theorists' goal of an
epistemology and politics of engaged, accountable positioning remains
eminently potent. The goal is better accounts of the world,
that is, "science."
Above all, rational knowledge does not pretend to disengagement:
to be from everywhere and so nowhere, to be free from interpretationf,
rom being represented,t o by fully self-containedo r
fully formalizableR. ationalk nowledgei s a process of ongoingc ritical
interpretationa mong" fieldso"f interpretersa nd decoders.R ational
knowledge is power-sensitive conversation.7 Decoding and
transcoding plus translation and criticism; all are necessary. So
science becomes the paradigmaticm odel, not of closure, but of
that which is contestable and contested. Science becomes the
myth, not of what escapes human agency and responsibilityi n a
realm above the fray, but, rather, of accountability and responsibilityf
or translationsa nd solidaritiesl inkingt he cacophonousv isions
and visionaryv oices that characterizeth e knowledgeso f the
subjugated. A splitting of senses, a confusion of voice and sight,
rather than clear and distinct ideas, becomes the metaphor for the
ground of the rational. We seek not the knowledges ruled by
phallogocentrism(n ostalgiaf or the presenceo f the one true Word)
and disembodied vision. We seek those ruled by partial sight and
limited voice-not partiality for its own sake but, rather, for the
sake of the connections and unexpected openings situated knowledges
make possible. Situated knowledges are about communities,
not about isolated individuals. The only way to find a larger vision
is to be somewhere in particular. The science question in feminism
is about objectivity as positioned rationality. Its images are
not the products of escape and transcendence of limits (the view
from above) but the joining of partial views and halting voices into
a collective subject position that promises a vision of the means of
ongoing finite embodiment, of living within limits and contradictions-
of views from somewhere.
This content downloaded from 128.12.188.47 on Sat, 22 Feb 2014 19:10:30 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
Donna Haraway 591
OBJECTS AS ACTORS: THE APPARATUS OF BODILY
PRODUCTION
Throughout this reflection on "objectivity,"I have refused to
resolve the ambiguities built into referring to science without differentiatingi
ts extraordinaryr angeo f contexts.T hrought he insistent
ambiguity,I have foregroundeda field of commonalitiesb inding
exact, physical, natural, social, political, biological, and human
sciences; and I have tied this whole heterogeneous field of
academically (and industrially, e.g., in publishing, the weapons
trade, and pharmaceuticalsi)n stitutionalizedk nowledge production
to a meaning of science that insists on its potency in
ideological struggles. But, partly in order to give play to both the
specificities and the highly permeable boundaries of meanings in
discourse on science, I would like to suggest a resolution to one
ambiguity. Throughout the field of meanings constituting science,
one of the commonalities concerns the status of any object of
knowledge and of related claims about the faithfulness of our accounts
to a "real world," no matter how mediated for us and no
matterh ow complexa nd contradictoryth ese worlds may be. Feminists,
and others who have been most active as critics of the
sciences and their claims or associated ideologies, have shied away
from doctrines of scientific objectivity in part because of the suspicion
that an "objecto"f knowledgei s a passive and inert thing. Accounts
of such objects can seem to be either appropriationso f a
fixed and determined world reduced to resource for instrumentalist
projects of destructive Western societies, or they can be seen
as masks for interests, usually dominating interests.
For example, "sex"a s an object of biologicalk nowledgea ppears
regularly in the guise of biological determinism, threatening the
fragile space for social constructionism and critical theory, with
their attendantp ossibilitiesf or active and transformativein tervention,
which were called into being by feminist concepts of gender
as socially, historically, and semiotically positioned difference.
And yet, to lose authoritativeb iologicala ccountso f sex, which set
up productive tensions with gender, seems to be to lose too much;
it seems to be to lose not just analytic power within a particular
Western tradition but also the body itself as anything but a blank
page for social inscriptions,i ncludingt hose of biologicald iscourse.
The same problemo f loss attendst he radical" reductiono"f the objects
of physics or of any other science to the ephemera of dis-
This content downloaded from 128.12.188.47 on Sat, 22 Feb 2014 19:10:30 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
592 Donna Haraway
cursive production and social construction.'8
But the difficulty and loss are not necessary. They derive partly
from the analytic tradition, deeply indebted to Aristotle and to the
transformativeh istory of "WhiteC apitalistP atriarchy"(h ow may
we name this scandalous Thing?) that turns everything into a resource
for appropriationi,n which an objecto f knowledgei s finally
itself only matter for the seminal power, the act, of the knower.
Here, the object both guarantees and refreshes the power of the
knower, but any status as agent in the productions of knowledge
must be denied the object. It -the world - must, in short, be objectified
as a thing, not as an agent; it must be matter for the selfformation
of the only social being in the productions of knowledge,
the human knower. Zoe Sofoulis19id entifiedt he structureo f
this mode of knowingi n technosciencea s "resourcing- "a s the second
birthing of Man through the homogenizing of all the world's
body into resource for his perverse projects. Nature is only the
raw material of culture, appropriated, preserved, enslaved, exalted,
or otherwise made flexible for disposal by culture in the
logic of capitalist colonialism. Similarly, sex is only matter to the
act of gender; the productionist logic seems inescapable in traditions
of Western binary oppositions. This analytical and historical
narrative logic accounts for my nervousness about the sex/gender
distinction in the recent history of feminist theory. Sex is "resourced"
fo r its representationa s gender,w hich "we"c an control.I t
has seemed all but impossible to avoid the trap of an appropriationist
logic of dominationb uilt into the nature/cultureo pposition
and its generative lineage, including the sex/gender distinction.
It seems clear that feminist accounts of objectivity and embodiment-
that is, of a world-of the kind sketched in this essay require
a deceptively simple maneuver within inherited Western
analytical traditions, a maneuver begun in dialectics but stopping
short of the needed revisions. Situated knowledges require that
the object of knowledge be pictured as an actor and agent, not as a
screen or a ground or a resource, never finally as slave to the
master that closes off the dialectic in his unique agency and his
authorshipo f "objectivek"n owledge.T he point is paradigmatically
clear in critical approaches to the social and human sciences,
where the agency of people studied itself transforms the entire
project of producing social theory. Indeed, coming to terms with
the agency of the "objectss"t udied is the only way to avoid gross
This content downloaded from 128.12.188.47 on Sat, 22 Feb 2014 19:10:30 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
Donna Haraway 593
error and false knowledge of many kinds in these sciences. But the
same point must apply to the other knowledge projects called
sciences. A corollary of the insistence that ethics and politics
covertly or overtly provide the bases for objectivity in the sciences
as a heterogeneous whole, and not just in the social sciences, is
grantingt he status of agent/actort o the "objectso"f the world. Actors
come in many and wonderful forms. Accounts of a "real"
world do not, then, depend on a logic of "discovery"b ut on a
power-chargeds ocial relationo f "conversationT."h e world neither
speaks itself nor disappears in favor of a master decoder. The
codes of the world are not still, waiting only to be read. The world
is not raw material for humanization; the thorough attacks on
humanism, another branch of "death of the subject" discourse,
have made this point quite clear. In some critical sense that is
crudely hinted at by the clumsy category of the social or of agency,
the world encountered in knowledge projects is an active entity.
Insofar as a scientific account has been able to engage this dimension
of the world as object of knowledge, faithful knowledge can
be imagined and can make claims on us. But no particular doctrine
of representation or decoding or discovery guarantees
anything. The approach I am recommending is not a version of
"realism,w" hich has proved a ratherp oor way of engagingw ith
the world's active agency.
My simple, perhaps simple-minded, maneuver is obviously not
new in Western philosophy, but it has a special feminist edge to it
in relation to the science question in feminism and to the linked
question of gender as situated difference and the question of
female embodiment. Ecofeminists have perhaps been most insistent
on some version of the world as active subject, not as resource
to be mapped and appropriated in bourgeois, Marxist, or masculinist
projects. Acknowledging the agency of the world in
knowledge makes room for some unsettling possibilities, including
a sense of the world's independent sense of humor. Such a
sense of humor is not comfortable for humanists and others committed
to the world as resource. There are, however, richly
evocativef igurest o promotef eministv isualizationso f the world as
witty agent. We need not lapse into appeals to a primal mother
resisting her translation into resource. The Coyote or Trickster, as
embodied in Southwest native American accounts, suggests the situation
we are in when we give up mastery but keep searching for
This content downloaded from 128.12.188.47 on Sat, 22 Feb 2014 19:10:30 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
594 Donna Haraway
fidelity, knowing all the while that we will be hoodwinked. I think
these are useful myths for scientists who might be our allies. Feminist
objectivity makes room for surprises and ironies at the heart
of all knowledge production; we are not in charge of the world.
We just live here and try to strike up noninnocent conversations
by means of our prosthetic devices, including our visualization
technologies. No wonder science fiction has been such a rich
writing practice in recent feminist theory. I like to see feminist
theory as a reinvented coyote discourse obligated to its sources in
many heterogeneous accounts of the world.
Another rich feminist practice in science in the last couple of
decades illustratesp articularlyw ell the "activationo"f the previously
passive categories of objects of knowledge. This activation
permanently problematizes binary distinctions like sex and
gender, without eliminating their strategic utility. I refer to the
reconstructions in primatology (especially, but not only, in
women's practice as primatologists, evolutionary biologists, and
behavioral ecologists) of what may count as sex, especially as
female sex, in scientific accounts.20 The body, the object of
biological discourse, becomes a most engaging being. Claims of
biological determinism can never be the same again. When female
"sex"h'a s been so thoroughlyr etheorizeda nd revisualizedt hat it
emerges as practicallyi ndistinguishablef rom "mind,"so mething
basic has happened to the categories of biology. The biological
female peopling current biological behavioral accounts has almost
no passive properties left. She is structuring and active in every
respect; the "body"is an agent, not a resource. Difference is
theorized biologicallya s situational,n ot intrinsic, at every level
from gene to foraging pattern, thereby fundamentally changing
the biological politics of the body. The relations between sex and
gender need to be categoricallyr eworkedw ithin these frames of
knowledge. I would like to suggest that this trend in explanatory
strategies in biology is an allegory for interventions faithful to projects
of feminist objectivity. The point is not that these new pictures
of the biological female are simply true or not open to contestationa
nd conversation- quite the opposite.B ut these pictures
foregroundk nowledgea s situatedc onversationa t every level of its
articulation.T he boundaryb etween animal and human is one of
the stakes in this allegory, as is the boundary between machine
and organism.
This content downloaded from 128.12.188.47 on Sat, 22 Feb 2014 19:10:30 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
Donna Haraway 595
So I will close with a final category useful to a feminist theory of
situated knowledges: the apparatus of bodily production. In her
analysis of the production of the poem as an object of literary
value, Katie King offers tools that clarify matters in the objectivity
debates among feminists. King suggests the term "apparatuso f
literaryp roduction"to refert o the emergenceo f literaturea t the intersection
of art, business, and technology. The apparatus of
literary production is a matrix from which "literaturei"s born.
Focusingo n the potent object of value called the "poem,"K inga pplies
her analytic framework to the relation of women and writing
technologies.21I would like to adapt her work to understanding
the generation-the actual production and reproduction-of
bodies and other objects of value in scientific knowledge projects.
At first glance, there is a limitation to using King's scheme inherent
in the "facticityo"f biologicald iscourset hat is absent from literary
discourse and its knowledge claims. Are biological bodies "produced"
o r "generatedi"n the same strongs ense as poems?F romt he
early stirrings of Romanticism in the late eighteenth century,
many poets and biologists have believed that poetry and organisms
are siblings.F rankensteimn ay be read as a meditationo n
this proposition. I continue to believe in this potent proposition
but in a postmodern and not a Romantic manner. I wish to translate
the ideologicald imensionso f "facticitya"n d "theo rganic"in to a
cumbersome entity called a "material-semiotiacc tor."T his unwieldy
term is intended to portray the object of knowledge as an
active, meaning-generatinpga rto f apparatuso f bodily production,
without ever implying the immediate presence of such objects or,
what is the same thing,t heirf inal or unique determinationo f what
can count as objective knowledge at a particular historical juncture.
Like "poems,"w hich are sites of literaryp roductionw here
language too is an actor independent of intentions and authors,
bodies as objects of knowledge are material-semioticg enerative
nodes. Their boundariesm aterializei n social interaction.B oundariesa
re drawn by mappingp ractices;" objectsd"o not preexista s
such. Objects are boundary projects. But boundaries shift from
within; boundaries are very tricky. What boundaries provisionally
contain remains generative, productive of meanings and bodies.
Siting (sighting)b oundariesi s a risky practice.
Objectivity is not about disengagement but about mutual and
usually unequal structuring, about taking risks in a world where
This content downloaded from 128.12.188.47 on Sat, 22 Feb 2014 19:10:30 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
596 Donna Haraway
"we"a re permanentlym ortal, that is, not in "final"c ontrol. We
have, finally, no clear and distinct ideas. The various contending
biological bodies emerge at the intersection of biological research
and writing, medical and other business practices, and technology,
such as the visualizationt echnologiese nlisteda s metaphorsi n this
essay. But also invited into that node of intersection is the
analogue to the lively languages that actively intertwine in the production
of literary value: the coyote and the protean embodiments
of the world as witty agent and actor. Perhaps the world resists being
reduced to mere resource because it is-not mother/matter/
mutter-but coyote, a figureo f the alwaysp roblematica, lways potent
tie between meaning and bodies. Feminist embodiment, feminist
hopes for partialityo, bjectivity,a nd situatedk nowledges,t urn
on conversations and codes at this potent node in fields of possible
bodies and meanings. Here is where science, science fantasy and
science fiction converge in the objectivity question in feminism.
Perhaps our hopes for accountability, for politics, for ecofeminism,
turn on revisioning the world as coding trickster with whom
we must learn to converse.
NOTES
This essay originated as a commentary on Sandra Harding's The Science Question in
Feminisma, t the WesternD ivision meetingso f the AmericanP hilosophicalA ssociation,
San Francisco, March 1987. Support during the writing of this paper was generously
provided by the Alpha Fund of the Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, New
Jersey. Thanks especially to Joan Scott, Judy Butler, Lila Abu-Lughod, and Dorinne
Kondo.
1. For example, see KarinK norr-Cetinaa nd Michael Mulkay, eds., ScienceO bserved:
Perspectives on the Social Study of Science (London: Sage, 1983); Wiebe E. Bijker, Thomas
P. Hughes, and Trevor Pinch, eds., The Social Construction of Technological Systems
(CambridgeM: ITP ress, 1987);a nd esp. BrunoL atour'sL esm icrobesg, uerree t paix, suivi
de irrdductions (Paris: M6tailid, 1984) and The Pastuerization of France, Followed by Irreductions:
A Politico-Scientific Essay (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1988). Borrowing
from Michel Tournier'sV endred(iP aris:G allimard,1 967),L es microbes( p. 171),
Latour's brilliant and maddening aphoristic polemic against all forms of reductionism,
makes the essential point for feminists: "M6fiez-vousd e la puret6; c'est le vitriol de
l'ame" (Beware of purity; it is the vitriol of the soul). Latour is not otherwise a notable
feminist theorist, but he might be made into one by readings as perverse as those he
makes of the laboratory,t hat greatm achine for makings ignificantm istakesf astert han
anyone else can, and so gainingw orld-changingp ower. The laboratoryf or Latouri s the
railroad industry of epistemology, where facts can only be made to run on the tracks
laid down from the laboratory out. Those who control the railroads control the sur-
This content downloaded from 128.12.188.47 on Sat, 22 Feb 2014 19:10:30 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
Donna Haraway 597
rounding territory. How could we have forgotten? But now it's not so much the bankrupt
railroads we need as the satellite network. Facts run on light beams these days.
2. For an elegant and very helpful elucidation of a noncartoon version of this argument,
see Hayden White, The Content of the Form: Narrative Discourse and Historical Representation
(Baltimore:J ohns Hopkins University Press, 1987). I still want more; and unfulfilled
desire can be a powerful seed for changing the stories.
3. In "Throughth e Lumen:F rankensteina nd the Optics of Re-Origination("P h.D. diss.
University of California at Santa Cruz, 1988), Zoe Sofoulis has produced a dazzling (she
will forgive me the metaphor) theoretical treatment of technoscience, the psychoanalysis
of science fiction culture, and the metaphoricso f extraterrestrialismi,n cluding a
wonderful focus on the ideologies and philosophies of light, illumination, and discovery
in Western mythics of science and technology. My essay was revised in dialogue with
Sofoulis's arguments and metaphors in her dissertation.
4. Nancy Hartsock, Money, Sex, and Power: An Essay on Domination and Community
(Boston: Northeastern University Press, 1984).
5. Crucial to this discussion are Sandra Harding, The Science Question in Feminism
(Ithaca:C ornell University Press, 1987); Evelyn Fox Keller, Reflectionso n Gendera nd
Science (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1984); Nancy Hartsock, "The Feminist
Standpoint:D eveloping the Groundf or a SpecificallyF eministH istoricalM aterialism,"
in Discovering Reality: Feminist Perspectives on Epistemology, Metaphysics, and Philosophy
of Science, eds. Sandra Harding and Merrill B. Hintikka (Dordrecht, The Netherlands:
Reidel, 1983): 283-310; Jane Flax's "Political Philosophy and the Patriarchal Unconscious,"
i n DiscoveringR eality,2 45-81;a nd "Postmodernisman d GenderR elationsi n
Feminist Theory," Signs 12 (Summer 1987): 621-43; Evelyn Fox Keller and Christine
Grontkowski," TheM ind'sE ye,"i n DiscoveringR eality,2 07-24; Hilary Rose, "Women's
Work, Women's Knowledge," in What Is Feminism? A Re-Examination, eds. Juliet Mitchell
and Ann Oakley (New York: Pantheon, 1986), 161-83; Donna Haraway, "A
Manifesto for Cyborgs: Science, Technology, and Socialist Feminism in the 1980s,"
SocialistR eview,n o. 80 (March-April1 985): 65-107; and Rosalind Pollack Petchesky,
"FetalI mages:T he Power of Visual Culture in the Politics of Reproduction,"F eminist
Studies 13 (Summer 1987): 263-92.
Aspects of the debates about modernism and postmodernism affect feminist analyses
of the problem of "objectivity."M appingt he fault line between modernisma nd postmodernism
in ethnography and anthropology-in which the high stakes are the
authorizationo r prohibitiont o craft comparativke nowledge across "cultures"M- arilyn
Strathern made the crucial observation that it is not the written ethnography that is
parallel to the work of art as object-of-knowledgeb, ut the culture.T he Romantica nd
modernistn atural-technicaol bjects of knowledge,i n science and in other culturalp ractice,
stand on one side of this divide. The postmodernist formation stands on the other
side, with its "anti-aesthetico"f permanentlys plit, problematized,a lways receding and
deferred "objects"o f knowledge and practice, including signs, organisms, systems,
selves, and cultures. "Objectivity"in a postmodern framework cannot be about unproblematico
bjects;it must be about specific prosthesisa nd always partialt ranslations.
At root, objectivity is about craftingc omparativek nowledge: How may a community
name things to be stable and to be like each other? In postmodernism, this query
translates into a question of the politics of redrawing of boundaries in order to have
non-innocent conversations and connections. What is at stake in the debates about
modernism and postmodernism is the pattern of relationships between and within
bodies and language.T his is a crucial matterf or feminists. See MarilynS trathern," Out
of Context:T he Persuasive Fictions of Anthropology,"C urrentA nthropology2 8 (June
1987): 251-81, and "Partial Connections," Munro Lecture, University of Edinburgh,
November 1987, unpublished manuscript.
6. Harding, 24-26, 161-62.
This content downloaded from 128.12.188.47 on Sat, 22 Feb 2014 19:10:30 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
598 Donna Haraway
7. John Varley's science fiction short story, "The Persistence of Vision," in The Persistence
of Vision (New York: Dell, 1978), 263-316, is part of the inspiration for this section.
In the story, Varley constructs a utopian community designed and built by the
deaf-blind. He then explores these people's technologies and other mediations of communication
and their relations to sighted children and visitors. In the story, "Blue
Champagne,"in Blue Champagn(eN ew York:B erkeley, 1986), 17-79,V arleyt ransmutes
the theme to interrogate the politics of intimacy and technology for a paraplegic young
woman whose prosthetic device, the golden gypsy, allows her full mobility. But
because the infinitely costly device is owned by an intergalactic communications and
entertainmente mpire, for which she works as a media star making" feelies,"s he may
keep her technological, intimate, enabling, other self only in exchange for her complicity
in the commodificationo f all experience.W hata re her limits to the reinventiono f experience
for sale?I s the personalp oliticalu ndert he sign of simulation?O ne way to read
Varley's repeated investigations of finally always limited embodiments, differently
abled beings, prosthetic technologies, and cyborgian encounters with their finitude,
despite their extraordinarytr anscendenceo f "organico"r ders,i s to find an allegoryf or
the personal and political in the historical mythic time of the late twentieth century, the
era of techno-biopoliticsP. rosthesisb ecomes a fundamentalc ategoryf or understanding
our most intimate selves. Prosthesis is semiosis, the making of meanings and bodies,
not for transcendence, but for power-charged communication.
8. C.D.B Bryan, The National Geographic Society: 100 Years of Adventure and Discovery
(New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1987), 352.
9. I owe my understanding of the experience of these photographs to Jim Clifford,
University of California at Santa Cruz, who identified their "land ho!" effect on the
reader.
10. Bryan, 454.
11. See Hartsock," TheF eminist Standpoint:D evelopingt he Groundf or a Specifically
FeministH istoricalM aterialism"a;n d Chela Sandoral,Y oursi n StruggleW: omenR espond
to Racism( Oakland:C enterf or ThirdW orldO rganizing,n .d.); Harding;a nd GloriaA nzaldua,
B orderlands/LFar ontera( SanF rancisco:S pinsters/AuntL ute, 1987).
12. Annette Kuhn, Women's Pictures: Feminism and Cinema (London: Routledge &
Kegan Paul, 1982), 3-18.
13. Joan Scott reminded me that Teresa de Lauretis put it like this:
Differenceasm ongw omenm ayb e betteru nderstooads differencews ithinw omen.. ..
But once
understood in their constitutive power -once it is understood, that is, that these differences not only
constitute each woman's consciousness and subjective limits but all together define the female subject
of feminismin its very specificity,i s inherenta nd at least for now irreconcilablec ontradiction-these
differences, then, cannot be again collapsed into a fixed identity, a sameness of all women as
Woman,o r a representationo f Feminisma s a coherenta nd availablei mage.
See Theresa de Lauretis, "Feminist Studies/Critical Studies: Issues, Terms, and Contexts,"
in her Feminist Studies/Critical Studies (Bloomington: Indiana University Press,
1986), 14-15.
14. ChandraM ohanty, "UnderW estern Eyes,"B oundary2 and 3 (1984):3 33-58.
15. See Sofoulis, unpublished manuscript.
16. In TheS cienceQ uestioni n Feminism( p. 18), Hardings uggests that gender has three
dimensions, each historically specific: gender symbolism, the social-sexual division of
labor, and processes of constructing individual gendered identity. I would enlarge her
point to note that there is no reason to expect the three dimensions to covary or codetermine
each other, at least not directly. That is, extremely steep gradients between contrasting
terms in gender symbolism may very well not correlate with sharp social-sexual
divisions of labor or social power, but they may be closely related to sharp racial
stratificationo r somethinge lse. Similarly,t he processes of gendereds ubjectf ormation
may not be directly illuminated by knowledge of the sexual division of labor or the
This content downloaded from 128.12.188.47 on Sat, 22 Feb 2014 19:10:30 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
Donna Haraway 599
gender symbolismi n the particularh istoricals ituationu nder examination.O n the other
hand, we should expect mediated relations among the dimensions. The mediations
might move through quite different social axes of organization of both symbols, practice,
and identity, such as race-and vice versa. I would suggest also that science, as
well as gender or race, might be usefully broken up into such a multipart scheme of
symbolism, social practice, and subject position. More than three dimensions suggest
themselves when the parallels are drawn. The different dimensions of, for example,
gender, race and science might mediate relations among dimensions on a parallel chart.
That is, racial divisions of labor might mediate the patterns of connection between symbolic
connections and formation of individual subject positions on the science or gender
chart. Or formations of gendered or racial subjectivity might mediate the relations between
scientific social division of labor and scientific symbolic patterns.
The chart below begins an analysis by parallel dissections. In the chart (and in
reality?),b oth gender and science are analyticallya symmetrical;t hat is, each term contains
and obscures a structuring hierarchicalized binary opposition, sex/gender and
nature/science. Each binary opposition orders the silent term by a logic of appropriation,
as resource to product, nature to culture, potential to actual. Both poles of the opposition
are constructed and structure each other dialectically. Within each voiced or
explicit term, further asymmetrical splittings can be excavated, as from gender,
masculine to feminine, and from science, hard sciences to soft sciences. This is a point
about remembering how a particular analytical tool works, willy-nilly, intended or not.
The chart reflects common ideological aspects of discourse on science and gender and
may help as an analytical tool to crack open mystified units like Science or Woman.
GENDER SCIENCE
1) symbolic system symbolic system
2) social division of labor social division of labor
(by sex, by race, etc.) (e.g., by craft or industrial logics)
3) individual identity/subject position individual identity/subject position
(desiring/desireda; utonomous relational)( knower/known;s cientist/other)
4) material culture material culture
(e.g., gender paraphernaliaa nd daily (e.g., laboratories,t he narrow tracks on
gender technologies, the narrow tracks which facts run)
on which sexual difference runs)
5) dialectic of construction and discovery dialectic of construction and discovery
17. Katie King, "Canons without Innocence" (Ph.D. diss., University of California at
Santa Cruz, 1987).
18. Evelyn Fox Keller, in "The Gender/Science System: Or, Is Sex to Gender As Nature
Is to Science?"( Hypatia2 [Fall 1987]:3 7-49), has insisted on the importantp ossibilities
opened up by the construction of the intersection of the distinction between sex and
gender, on the one hand, and nature and science, on the other. She also insists on the
need to hold to some nondiscursiveg roundingi n "sex"a nd "nature,p"e rhapsw hat I am
calling the "body"a nd "world."
19. See Sofoulis, chap. 3.
20. Donna Haraway, Primate Visions: Gender, Race, and Nature in the World of Modem
Science (New York: Routledge & Kegan Paul), forthcoming Spring 1989.
21. Katie King, prospectus for "The Passing Dreams of Choice ... Once Before and
After: Audre Lorde and the Apparatus of Literary Production" (MS, University of
Maryland, College Park, Maryland, 1987).
This content downloaded from 128.12.188.47 on Sat, 22 Feb 2014 19:10:30 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions